Michael Dean (mdean) said that a new release 
(feature wise) is probably about 3 or 4 weeks away, since the 
database upgrade was going to be huge. As of this writing, he may make an 
interim bug fix/small feature release to get some of the email support 
down.
Daniel Baumann (chillywilly) pointed out that 
this abstraction thingy GComm could be 
confused with the GNU Comm project. But as far as Jason Cater (jcater) was 
concerned, GComm is our internal package name... 
to the external world, it's GNUe Common, but said that was a good 
point. Later, Derek Neighbors (dneighbo) explained that pyro was an object 
system like GComm would be, written by the same 
guys that wrote pygmy, the python email client.
Charles Rouzer (Mr_You) needed a production 
quality GNUe web shopping cart ;-). Instead, he was looking to 
customize Interchange to provide a web shopping cart using PHP. Jason Cater 
(jcater) said that, although GNUe Inventory was not yet completed, you should be 
able to access another inventory package via GNUe Applications Server. 
However, the web interface for GNUe Forms was still in the works, as 
Michael Maluck (madlocke) had been quite ill.
Four days later, Charles asked if anyone had seen Michael Maluck
(madlocke). Daniel Baumann (chillywilly) wanted to know 
did he ever give up the code for this web forms 
stuff? Or it still a mystical imaginary animal?
Derek Neighbors (dneighbo) was seeing a GREAT 
value in DCL as a communication tool to customers,  
and as a billing tool and todo tool. But the communication tool would break 
when accounts had different products. It would be fairly easy to implement 
who-can-view-what by product, but then the next step would become billing (or 
services), at which point products and services would need to be 'separate'. This 
hadn't mattered before DCL was seen as a communications tool. 
Derek Neighbors (dneighbo) had written a contact 
manager to do assignments for GNUe; and Jason Cater had a fully functional 
40 node call centre. The call centre was not using Bayonne, although they would 
like to. Derek reckoned GNUe was about the best GPL-licensed system he had seen for 
RAPID development of cross platform applications. There were about 5 active 
developers, 10 more regular contributors, 30 people with assignments and several 
hundred on the mailing lists. There was no date f
It was asked if GNUe Application Server (GEAS) uses database triggers or did 
triggers itself. Derek Neighbors (dneighbo) said it 
could really do either. They were also looking to support 
load balancing and replication in GEAS. But if your database supported it, 
you could have load balancing occuring behind GEAS. But several people 
thought that load balancing with GEAS could be complicated.
Daniel Baumann (chillywilly) confirmed that GNUe needs Python 2 - 
er, the python stuff does anyway.
The next day, Andrew Mitchell (ajmitch) asked if GNUe stuff 
works on GNU/Hurd. Jeff Bailey (jbailey)
said GNU/Hurd did not have Python 2 as of time of writing.
Derek Neighbors (dneighbo) claimed GNUe Applications Server (GEAS) is Windows 
ready, but depends on orbit which didn't 
do Windows well - he wanted to move to omniORB. Jason Cater was feverishly 
working on gcomm, an RPC abstraction mechanism that would give lots of 
flexibility.
